# Documentation

$docnav

The fac documentation consists of several web pages.  You can navigate
the site using the menu links, but this page gives you an additional
overview of what you will learn from each page.

[getting started](getting-started.html)
: This page will lead you through creating your first fac file and
  using fac.

[building fac](building.html)
: This page will lead you through downloading and installing fac.

[feature comparison](features.html)
: This page compares fac with three other build systems in a
feature-by-feature way.

## To do list

1. Do not read facfile that was generated by a command that failed!

1. Figure out a clean solution to environment variables.  The current
   approach of blacklisting individual transient variables will not
   scale.  However, the scons approach of whitelisting environment
   variables that will be maintained has a tendency to be frustrating:
   developers don't know why things aren't working.  One option would
   be to let users create their own blacklists or whitelists.  That
   has the advantage of transparency, but places the burden of
   maintaining these lists on our users, which is silly.  Possibly we
   could support a default blacklist in /etc, which could be
   maintained by myself and distribution developers.  But that still
   seems like a poor choice.

1. Make sure when we create a fd that we do so in the "primary" pid
   when threads are involved.

1. Move build process to use only python3 and not python2.

1. Look into using libseccomp to optimize the ptrace usage by having
   only the system calls we want to trace generate events.

2. Handle nonexistent files as dependencies, if a process tried to
   open them or stat them.

3. Port to darwin/macos.

3. Port to windows.

## See also (incomplete)

* [Documentation of the code](code-guide.html)

* [Signatures and git](signatures.html)
